---
title: Navigating the Project
navigation:
  title: Navigating the Project
---
## Places in Ottoman Istanbul

The map on the home page shows places in Constantinople and its surroundings, which are mentioned in the travel accounts or depicted in the images. The main focus is on the historical peninsula of Constantinople, but the former Genoese settlement of Pera-Galata, the district of Hasköy, the boroughs of Eyüp, Üsküdar (Chrysopolis), and Kadıköy (Chalcedon), the Thracian hinterland, the shores of the Bosporus, and the Princes Islands are also included. By clicking on the points on the map, the user will be able to see the names of the sites included. Clicking on each name will open a side bar with the data relevant to the site in question: basic facts about its use and history and a list of sources which mention or depict it, as well as a list of events (mostly visits to the respective monuments). 

The list of places includes Byzantine and Ottoman sites attested in the 16th-century textual and visual sources compiled by travelers from the Holy Roman Empire. For each place there is a concise description regarding its history and location, as well as its condition and use during the 16th century. For Ottoman places there is an attempt to corelate them with the Byzantine background of the city. The place entries are complemented by bibliographic references – these are not exhaustive, they include the most important titles covering the diverse aspects of each site, with a special emphasis on books and articles that deal with the 16th-century phases of the monuments.

## References in texts, depictions in images

Each "Place" entry includes links to the available sources that mention it, with the appropriate bibliographic references. The textual sources are passages from travel accounts, travel journals, and official reports written by members of diplomatic delegations, pilgrims, or captives from the lands of the Holy Roman Empire who spent time in the capital of the Ottoman Empire. The earliest texts included here are the reports by the envoys Janos Hoberdanesz and Sixtus Weyxelberger of their diplomatic mission in 1528, whereas the latest account is that by Maximilian Brandstetter, completed in 1608. Here the passages from the travelogues are presented in their original language, namely German, Latin, French, or Italian (the envoys of the Holy Roman Empire were multilingual and originated from various parts of the Empire, not all of them German-speaking); the only exception to this rule is the journal written by the Bohemian author Wenceslas von Mitrowitz, excerpts of which have been included in English translation. 

Images of 16th-century Istanbul and its monuments are included here as visual sources. The entries are illustrated with image files in jpeg or tiff format (details about the licenses are given for each image separately). Views depicting multiple monuments are annotated to indicate each place shown – these annotations are visible with the help of the embedded IIIF viewer. Texts such as captions and legends accompanying images are also included; they are provided in their original language (like the purely textual sources), transcribed from the original paintings, drawings, and woodcuts. 

## Books from Ottoman Istanbul

To illustrate the process of transferring objects from Istanbul to cities in the Holy Roman Empire, an eloquent type of “traveling artifacts” has been selected, namely Greek medieval and early modern manuscripts acquired in Istanbul by visitors from the German-speaking world (they are now preserved in various European libraries, primarily in Austrian and in Germany). The Manuscript entries (entered into the Database as “Artifacts”) contain the basic data concerning the material attributes of the books, their date, some information about their contents, and a concise outline of their history prior to their transfer to Western Europe. Since the project is not a paleographic or philological study, the user is advised to use the links to the Pinakes database via the corresponding Diktyon number contained in the entry for each manuscript, where they can find further information on the codicology, paleography, and textual transmission. The entries here also contain links to digitized versions of the manuscripts available from the digital repositories of the library institutions where they are preserved.
